Doc/whatsnew/3.3.rst, before:

****************************
  What's New In Python 3.3
****************************

:Author: Raymond Hettinger
:Release: |release|
:Date: |today|

.. $Id$
   Rules for maintenance:

   * Anyone can add text to this document.  Do not spend very much time
   on the wording of your changes, because your text will probably
   get rewritten to some degree.

   * The maintainer will go through Misc/NEWS periodically and add
   changes; it's therefore more important to add your changes to
   Misc/NEWS than to this file.

   * This is not a complete list of every single change; completeness
   is the purpose of Misc/NEWS.  Some changes I consider too small
   or esoteric to include.  If such a change is added to the text,
   I'll just remove it.  (This is another reason you shouldn't spend
   too much time on writing your addition.)

   * If you want to draw your new text to the attention of the
   maintainer, add 'XXX' to the beginning of the paragraph or
   section.

   * It's OK to just add a fragmentary note about a change.  For
   example: "XXX Describe the transmogrify() function added to the
   socket module."  The maintainer will research the change and
   write the necessary text.

   * You can comment out your additions if you like, but it's not
   necessary (especially when a final release is some months away).

   * Credit the author of a patch or bugfix.   Just the name is
   sufficient; the e-mail address isn't necessary.

   * It's helpful to add the bug/patch number as a comment:

   % Patch 12345
   XXX Describe the transmogrify() function added to the socket
   module.
   (Contributed by P.Y. Developer.)

   This saves the maintainer the effort of going through the SVN log
   when researching a change.

This article explains the new features in Python 3.3, compared to 3.2.


PEP XXX: Stub
=============


Other Language Changes
======================

Some smaller changes made to the core Python language are:

* Stub


New, Improved, and Deprecated Modules
=====================================

* Stub

os
--

The :mod:`os` module has a new :func:`~os.sendfile` function which provides an
efficent "zero-copy" way for copying data from one file (or socket) descriptor
to another.
The phrase "zero-copy" refers to the fact that all of the copying of data
between the two descriptors is done entirely by the kernel, with no copying of
data into userspace buffers.
:func:`~os.sendfile` can be used to efficiently copy data from a file on disk to
a network socket, e.g. for downloading a file.

(Patch submitted by Ross Lagerwall and Giampaolo Rodolà in :issue:`10882`.)

Optimizations
=============

Major performance enhancements have been added:

* Stub


Build and C API Changes
=======================

Changes to Python's build process and to the C API include:

* Stub


Porting to Python 3.3
=====================

This section lists previously described changes and other bugfixes
that may require changes to your code:

* Stub

Commit message:

Issue 10784: adds os.getpriority() and os.setpriority() functions.

Doc/whatsnew/3.3.rst, after:

****************************
  What's New In Python 3.3
****************************

:Author: Raymond Hettinger
:Release: |release|
:Date: |today|

.. $Id$
   Rules for maintenance:

   * Anyone can add text to this document.  Do not spend very much time
   on the wording of your changes, because your text will probably
   get rewritten to some degree.

   * The maintainer will go through Misc/NEWS periodically and add
   changes; it's therefore more important to add your changes to
   Misc/NEWS than to this file.

   * This is not a complete list of every single change; completeness
   is the purpose of Misc/NEWS.  Some changes I consider too small
   or esoteric to include.  If such a change is added to the text,
   I'll just remove it.  (This is another reason you shouldn't spend
   too much time on writing your addition.)

   * If you want to draw your new text to the attention of the
   maintainer, add 'XXX' to the beginning of the paragraph or
   section.

   * It's OK to just add a fragmentary note about a change.  For
   example: "XXX Describe the transmogrify() function added to the
   socket module."  The maintainer will research the change and
   write the necessary text.

   * You can comment out your additions if you like, but it's not
   necessary (especially when a final release is some months away).

   * Credit the author of a patch or bugfix.   Just the name is
   sufficient; the e-mail address isn't necessary.

   * It's helpful to add the bug/patch number as a comment:

   % Patch 12345
   XXX Describe the transmogrify() function added to the socket
   module.
   (Contributed by P.Y. Developer.)

   This saves the maintainer the effort of going through the SVN log
   when researching a change.

This article explains the new features in Python 3.3, compared to 3.2.


PEP XXX: Stub
=============


Other Language Changes
======================

Some smaller changes made to the core Python language are:

* Stub


New, Improved, and Deprecated Modules
=====================================

* Stub

os
--

* The :mod:`os` module has a new :func:`~os.sendfile` function which provides
  an efficent "zero-copy" way for copying data from one file (or socket)
  descriptor to another. The phrase "zero-copy" refers to the fact that all of
  the copying of data between the two descriptors is done entirely by the
  kernel, with no copying of data into userspace buffers. :func:`~os.sendfile`
  can be used to efficiently copy data from a file on disk to a network socket,
  e.g. for downloading a file.

  (Patch submitted by Ross Lagerwall and Giampaolo Rodolà in :issue:`10882`.)

* The :mod:`os` module has two new functions: :func:`~os.getpriority` and
  :func:`~os.setpriority`. They can be used to get or set process
  niceness/priority in a fashion similar to :func:`os.nice` but extended to all
  processes instead of just the current one.

  (Patch submitted by Giampaolo Rodolà in :issue:`10784`.)

Optimizations
=============

Major performance enhancements have been added:

* Stub


Build and C API Changes
=======================

Changes to Python's build process and to the C API include:

* Stub


Porting to Python 3.3
=====================

This section lists previously described changes and other bugfixes
that may require changes to your code:

* Stub
